# {{Page}}

# Script Title

## Some info about the script

This info will be in a Segment. Segments are parts of Pages.

Pages are things read by {{people // my homeroom teachers from the past seven years // furries with no jobs}}. These people pass the phone around from person to person, in order, to celebrate {{an occasion // Halloween // Jupiter going faster than Saturn}}.

Each lib is its own Segment. Each block of text between libs, between the beginning of a Page and the first lib, between the last lib and the end of a Page, or between the beginning and end of the rare Page with no libs in it, it its own Segment.

Segments will appear in order in an array called "Segments".

# {{Page}}

## Some info about this section, optional

Not all Pages have headings, just like not all {{practitioners of an occupation // plumbers // underground gardeners }} have {{useful items // hand-warmers // pots to piss in}}.

# {{ Page }}

Here we have a Page with uncommon characteristics.

Firstly, it has no libs. Secondly, it has no page heading. It is a libless, headingless, Page.

# {{ Page }}

## Back to normal

This is the last page. Some of the statements made earlier in this document about the script structure may be inaccurate, like {{something inaccurate // a one-handed clock // a book report}}.

# {{Page}}

Now let's see some special formatting.

    four spaces of indent
    for a code block
    (not common in haggadahs)
    so we will render this as
    centered and italicized, like
    a song, poem, or prayer
    Lines in this format should not get much space after them

That's about it, except for the different heading levels.

### h3 for a level 3

#### h4 for a level 4

##### h5 for a level 5

###### h6 for a level 6
