# {{ Page }}
# Mad Liberation 3: Haggadlibs
### Holy intro, Shabbatman!
Have you ever wondered why Jews ## do things Jews do?


For instance, have you ever seen someone named ## a very Jewish name, and wondered why they ## did a thing Jews do? Why do Jews become attorneys? Why do they make jokes about lox? Why don’t they play basketball (well)? Why don’t they recruit? Why don’t they ## do a thing Jews don’t do?


Most importantly, why aren’t they still in Egypt building pyramids for Pharaoh?


Tonight, we are going to explain all of this, for the first time in each of your lives. You have definitely never learned any of this before. Ever. Tonight’s revelations will be as new to you as ## something you’ve never experienced.


That being said, let’s sing a song in Hebrew that I’m assuming we all know the words to.


    קַדֵּשׁ The blessing over wine | kadeish |
    וּרְחַץ Ritual hand-washing in preparation for the seder | urchatz |
    כַּרְפַּס Dipping a green vegetable in salt water| karpas |
    יַחַץ Breaking the middle matzah | yachatz |
    מַגִּידTelling the story of Passover | magid |
    רָחְצָה Ritual hand-washing in preparation for the meal | rachtza |
    מוֹצִיא מַצָּהThe blessing over the meal and matzah | motzi matzah |
    מָרוֹר Dipping the bitter herb in sweet charoset | maror |
    כּוֹרֵךְ Eating a sandwich of matzah and bitter herb | koreich |
    שֻׁלְחָן עוֹרֵךְ Eating the meal! | shulchan oreich |
    צָפוּן Finding and eating the afikoman | tzafoon |
    בָּרֵךְ Saying grace after the meal and inviting Elijah the Prophet | bareich |
    הַלֵּל Singing songs that praise God | hallel |
    נִרְצָה Ending the seder and thinking about the future | nirtzah |


# {{ Page }}
### Further intro
Tonight is the passover seder, Charlton Heston’s favorite story. On this night, we tell the tale of how we are no longer slaves, but instead we are ## a type of person (plural). Speaking of slaves...we are forcing you to tell this story with us! And to worship.


We’re going to break bread, pour wine, serve ghosts, ## take a celebratory action, and wash our hands of it all. To start anew. Ahem. To start aJew. So let’s Begin like Menachem!


# {{ Page }}
You gotta be Kiddushing me! (the blessing over קַדֵּשׁ wine) | kadeish 
Tonight’s story will be better on an empty stomach. And four glasses of wine. Our tale best enjoyed when forgotten, for enhanced re-telling year after year, unto eternity, like ## something repetitive. Amen.


See thee now your cups before thee.


STAGE DIRECTION: Gesture to your cup. Pause for all to acknowledge their cups.


Fill not thy own cup, fellow sedergoers, for we are Jews. It is time to Jew unto others as you would have others ## word that rhymes with “Jew” unto Jewself.


Seriously now, everyone, pour wine into the cup of the person, not to your left, not to your right, but of the person who sits to your east, of that person which sits between you and Jerusalem.


The person sitting closest to Jerusalem must fill their own cup. You’ve got the best seat in the house!


Now raise thy glass, and sing along to the blessing of the ## sacred thing.


בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי הַגָּפֶן:
Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, borei p’ree hagafen.


בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם,
 שֶׁהֶחֱיָנוּ וְקִיְּמָנוּ וְהִגִּיעָנוּ לַזְּמַן הַזֶּה:
Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam,
she-hechiyanu v’key’manu v’higiyanu lazman hazeh.


And we all know what that means.


# {{ Page }}
You better wash yourself (in saltwater!) | urchatz
As the great Haggadah of the Wikipedia tradition says, “Whenever one partakes of fruits or vegetables dipped in liquid while remaining wet, one must wash one's hands, if the fruit or vegetable remains wet.”


In fact, let’s sing that in its traditional passover tune form.


Open the hymnals placed at your station, and sing with me, roughly to the tune of the Why Is This Night Different? song.


STAGE DIRECTION: All must sing.


 Whenever one partakes,
Of fruits or vegetables,
Dipped in liquid,
While remaining wet,


One must wash one’s hands,
One must wash one’s hand,
If the fruit or vegetable…


One must wash one’s hands,
One must wash one’s hand,
If the fruit remains wet.


I heard that you had to wash fruit whenever it remained ## adjective, but whatever.


# {{ Page }}
Appreciation break
Ahhhhhhhhhhhhh-ppreciation break!


Friends, I appreciate you. Let’s stop the clock for just a moment, and let’s each of us say something we appreciate. Be mindful of time. We’ll start with the person to my ## left or right and go ## clockwise or counterclockwise.


# {{ Page }}
When we dip, you dip, we dip a green vegetable in saltwater | karpas כַּרְפַּס
Now that we’re feeling so much more ## feeling, we’d better take a “dip” into our ancestral sadness. Let’s drink a little bit of the tears shed by our enslaved ancestors. Yum.


Everyone confront the little bit of saltwater in your work area. If you don’t have one, quickly think of ## something sad and cry into a nearby ## container.


Now we’ve got saltwater. Fresh from the ## body of saltwater. It’s not just saltwater. It represents the many tears cried by our poor ancestors who had it oh so much harder than we did. If you like it then you better dip a vegetable in it.


STAGE DIRECTION: Hold up your green vegetable.


All must sing.


בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי הָאֲדָמָה:
Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, borei p’ree ha-adama.
We praise God, Ruler of Everything, who creates the fruits of the earth.


All must dip. All must eat what all have dipped.


# {{ Page }}
יַחַץ What you lookin' at cracker, I'll break you! | yachatz


Ok, crackers. You’ve probably heard of matzah. You probably know that it’s not dessert. It’s about as desserticious as ## something gross.


But I guess if you’re in the desert, and you have nothing else, except for sand, and you hang around getting beaten all day, and you wish you were dead, and the highlight of your life is when the ## heavy thing you have to carry is only as heavy as ## something very heavy, then in that case, matzah wouldn’t be that bad.


We shall now prepare dessert, in honor of dess-ert-ain death faced by our ancestors as they ran from Pharaoh. You may have noticed three matzohs stacked on the table like ## something that comes in a stack.


STAGE DIRECTION: Gesture to three matzohs.


Someone, anyone, please break the middle matzoh into two pieces, and hand me the larger piece.


This larger piece is the afikoman. The host shall now wrap up said afikoman in a dessert napkin, and shall eventually hide it somewhere for the children to find. Not only is matzah your dessert, but you have to go and find it in Jamey’s ## part of a house now, too. Isn’t this the best holiday?


# {{ Page }}
Pre-magid
Hey ## fictional character who loves freedom, don’t you love freedom? Aren’t you glad you’re not building stone pyramids, but sampling from the food pyramid instead?


Well that’s not by coincidence. It’s not like ## a coincidence. And it’s not because you’re so damn ## desirable trait, like “good”. It’s because you’re Jewish.


You probably have some questions. But I have a better one: who is the YOUNGEST person here? That is, who is the FURTHEST in age from Israel?


STAGE DIRECTION: Wait for this young sucker to identify themself.


Hahaha! You’re young, loser! Way to be born after us! Can’t wait to die before you! Ask your questions.
# {{ Page: Youngest }}


Hi, everyone! I’m so young that I ## do something babies do. I don’t even have my ## something only an adult has yet. I don’t even know how to ## do something ONLY an adult knows how to do.


All I can do is…sing! In perfect Hebrew.


STAGE DIRECTION: Everyone sings.


מַה נִּשְׁתַּנָּה הַלַּֽיְלָה הַזֶּה מִכָּל הַלֵּילוֹת?
Ma nishtana halaila hazeh mikol haleilot?


שֶׁבְּכָל הַלֵּילוֹת אָֽנוּ אוֹכְלִין חָמֵץ וּמַצָּה. הַלַּֽיְלָה הַזֶּה כֻּלּוֹ מַצָּה:
Shebichol haleilot anu ochlin chameitz u-matzah. Halaila
hazeh kulo matzah.


שֶׁבְּכָל הַלֵּילוֹת אָֽנוּ אוֹכְלִין שְׁאָר יְרָקוֹת הַלַּֽיְלָה הַזֶּה מָרוֹר:
Shebichol haleilot anu ochlin shi’ar yirakot. Halaila hazeh
Maror.


בְּכָל הַלֵּילוֹת אֵין אָֽנוּ מַטְבִּילִין אֲפִילוּ פַּֽעַם אֶחָת.
 הַלַּֽיְלָה הַזֶּה שְׁתֵּי פְעָמִים:
Shebichol haleilot ain anu matbilin afilu pa-am echat. Halaila hazeh shtei pa-amim.


שֶׁבְּכָל הַלֵּילוֹת אָֽנוּ אוֹכְלִין בֵּין יוֹשְׁבִין וּבֵין מְסֻבִּין.
 הַלַּֽיְלָה הַזֶּה כֻּלָּֽנוּ מְסֻבִּין:
Shebichol haleilot anu ochlin bein yoshvin uvein m’subin.
Halaila hazeh kulanu m’subin.


I know you’re all as old as ## something old and might not speak Hebrew, so I’ll translate that for you.


I said, why is this night different from all other nights? I mean, I usually do the exact same thing every night, specifically, I ## take an action, every night, but tonight, I’m here with you. Why?


# {{ Page: Post-Youngest }}


That is a very…## pejorative adjective, like “bad” question. I’m not going to dignify that with a response. Do it again, but better. 


# {{ Page: Youngest }}


What I really wanna know is: on all other nights I eat leavened bread and matzoh, but tonight I’m only eating matzoh. And like nine other courses. Why? Why am I not sitting in my ## place where a young person would sit, hard at work ## doing a thing a young person does, wearing ## something a young person wears?


# {{ Page: Post-Youngest }}


Wait, you eat matzoh every other night?


And besides, how can you ask that? That’s like asking ## a question to which absolutely everyone knows the answer. It’s because we were slaves. Duh! Make sense? Matzoh is to the Jewry what ## a snack from the 1990s or earlier is to ## a culinary professional. Our slave ancestors ate matzoh because they were time-constrained. What’s your next question?


# {{ Page: Youngest }}


I mean to say, on all other nights, I mean every single night, I eat every single vegetable, including ## a type of vegetable. Tonight, I’m only eating bitter herb.


# {{ Page: Post-Youngest }}


Well, you see, we were slaves. And that sucks. Like ## something that sucks. And bitter herbs suck. Unlike vegetables.


# {{ Page: Youngest }}


Thank you. Next question: I never dip. I’m dry like ## something dry. I don’t dip in ## a type of dip. I don’t dip in ## a type of sauce. I don’t even dip in ## something very wet. Why am I constantly dipping tonight?


# {{ Page: Post-Youngest }}


Because we were slaves.


# {{ Page: Youngest }}


Why...


# {{ Page: Post-Youngest }}


Because we were slaves.


# {{ Page: Youngest }}


Ok, last question. On all other nights, I don’t recline. I eat my food standing straight up. Why are you making me eat this meal flat on my back snuggled up with a ## something snuggly? Why are you making me relax?


# {{ Page: Post-Youngest }}


Because you’re my slave! JK. It’s because we WERE slaves. And now you’re not, so RECLINE!
Pre-magid 2: the Four Sons
There are four types of Jews in the world. All of them are men. Some Jews are ## a good quality, like “good”, some are ## a bad quality, like “bad”. Some are ## a neutral quality, like “neutral”. Finally, some Jews just babble incoherently.


STAGE DIRECTION: Point in the direction you’re about to pass the script.


And here they are. Let’s get on with the Q&A.


# {{ Page }}
The Wise Son
Greetings. I am extremely wise. Indeed, I once discovered that the ## mathematical term of ## a quantity is simply ## a quality.


It was me who first stated:


Ask not what your ## thing can do for you, but what ## thing can do for your ## thing.


Yet even I do not know everything about Passover. So what does it all mean? Intellectually speaking.


# {{ Page }}
The Wise Answer
If you’re so smart, why don’t you just read the Torah? Just listen, genius, we are literally explaining Passover right now. And when we’re done we’re gonna ## take an action.


Now why don’t hear from someone a little more...wicked.


# {{ Page }}
The Wicked Son
Sup, ## insult, plural. I don’t care about my people. All I wanna do is ## do something bad people do. And eat ## something bad people put in their mouths.


STAGE DIRECTION: Turn to the person to your right.


Hey, you. You look like you just crawled out of ## a place.


STAGE DIRECTION: Turn to the person to your left.


And you look like you just got off the ## form of transportation from ## a remote location.


So why should a ## word for a tough person, like “motherfucker” like me care about Passover?


# {{ Page }}
The Wicked Answer
Judge not, lest ye be judged. When God freed us from slavery on the first Passover, he only took the people who deserved it. If you had been a slave back then, the pyramids would be shaped like ## a body part, plural.


So wicked of you to ask questions when your idiot brother doesn’t know anything. Please, pass the script to the Simple Son.


# {{ Page }}
The Simple Son
I just have a simple question. I think. What is ## any word?


# {{ Page }}
The Simple Answer
Um, are you talking about Passover? I’ll give you a choice. It’s either a) ## a thing, b) ## a thing, or c) Passover.


Pick one, and then let’s hear from the Son Who Knows Not How to Ask.


# {{ Page }}
The Son Who Knows Not How to Ask
Fib duelly dobn’t. Lig hunnuno, brig ## nonsense word simplatasta? Fem benna ben, renna ren ## noun spybooky.


Glist mailly o’slig. Clubber flam slub cranberry wallopberg. Clamp blump fluggle mupslip wrendle limp scooply blambombergeryupcolitis wisler merp dugnip hamp damp CRUM ## ADJECTIVE. Passover!


STAGE DIRECTION: Cry.


# {{ Page }}
The Answer to End All Answers
There, there. Moses will take care of everything, with his sidekick, God. Prepare to learn.


בָדִים הָיִינוּ הָיִינוּ. עַתָּה בְּנֵי חוֹרִין:
Avadim hayinu. Ata b’nei chorin.


# {{ Page }}
מַגִּיד The ass-kicking part | magid
Ever since the time of ## a historical event, our people were slaves. In Egypt, no less. Our ruler was an evil Pharaoh named Darth Seder. They seder are worse people, but I don’t believe them.


When Pharaoh first enslaved us, he thought, “I love forcing these Jews to do work! I really love how there’s a fixed number of them.” But the Jews ## verb, past tense, and so they multiplied.


“Say, der sure are a lot more Jews around these days,” complained Pharaoh. “And a lot less corned ## edible things, since they keep eating it.”


“Perhaps,” suggested Pharaoh’s trusted ## professional, “We should control their population with some sensible program of family planning.”


“Agreed,” said Pharaoh thoughtfully. “Kill all the male babies.”


# {{ Page }}
Enter Puah


Now Puah was the boss of the ## professionals, who were responsible for catching all the babies as they came out of all the vaginas. Pharaoh’s ## professional delivered a message at their weekly meeting:


“I’ve got good news,” he said. “Pharaoh has discovered a way to eliminate half your workload. ## Violent transitive verb phrase, like “step on” every Hebrew boy who gets born. Repeat until the boy dies.”


“Oh, those Puah, Puah Hebrew boys,” cried Puah.


# {{ Page }}
Moses gets born, adopted, and banished
One year on Moses’s birthday, a boy was born who was so ## a good quality that no one wanted to ## violent transitive verb phrase, like “step on” him. “Awwwww, he’s adorable,” said a midwife. “Dump him in the river.”


And so Moses floated directly to Pharaoh’s daughter’s ## place. She raised him, loved him, ## verb (past tense), transitive him, and he grew up to be the kingdom’s ## person who mediates arguments. It was his job to solve arguments.


An Egyptian man had an argument with a Jewish slave. The dispute was that the Egyptian was ## VERB (ending in ING) him. “I have a solution,” said Moses, after taking notes. And he ## verbed the Egyptian until he died.


“Oh, no, Miss,” said Pharaoh’s daughter’s brother, “that Moses has to go, ‘sis.” And they rode Moses out of town on a ## thing.


# {{ Page }}
Easter’s coming, so save our peeps! 
In Moses’s exile, there were sheep, and babes, and ## extinct animals, and kids, and one important thing.


As Moses strolled up the mount, singing,


I love God
His love is true
God is a man
And I am, too


He glimpsed a beautiful, ## adjective red-haired woman. He walked ## preposition the lady, but before he could even catcall her, she said, “I’m God.”


“You’re a chick?” said Moses. “And a redhead? I always thought God would be ## a non-redheaded ethnicity. Well, God damn!”


“Kiss my burning bush,” said God. “You just bought yourself a hard-ass job...”


And God commanded all of us, here, tonight, to sing that hit song from the movie Frozen: Let My People Go.


STAGE DIRECTION: All sing, “Let My People Go.”


“In summary,” said God, “go tell Pharaoh to choose between freeing the Jews, or ten ## bad things.”


# {{ Page }}
The Ten Plague Commandments
Pharaoh chose a third option: forcing the Jews to ## take an action against their will. 


So Moses stretched out his left leg, took off his left shoe and left sock, spread the palm of his foot toward Darth Seder, and wiggled his pinky toe, saying, “This little piggy brought a grievous plague to the house of Egypt.”


The next time you go to the banks, you will see the wrath of the flood.
All of Egypt will suffer a mighty thirst and dryness, as the river fills with ## noun.


# {{ Page }}


Still a slave, and now balanced on his right foot only, Moses raised his left ring toe, and wobbled, and said,


As I hop on my right foot, so shall hoppity hop the Kingdom of Egypt, like ## a person on a log,
As all the land shall crawl with ## things.


# {{ Page }}


Moses fell in the blood, and came to the surface still a slave. He gave the middle toe to Pharaoh, and riddled:


What goes to school on your son’s head, and bites mice?
It’s not beast nor burden, it was dust, now it’s ## noun.


# {{ Page }}


“Somebody cut off this guy’s toes,” said Pharaoh.


“Toe, yeah?” asked Toses, and he sang a happy song with his left pointer toe, to the tune of Disney’s Beauty and the You Know What:


Certain as your son dying before the feast,
Tale as old as time, bread without the yeast, God shall bring the ## noun (plural).


# {{ Page }}


“Uhhhhhh-oh,” said Moses, “This toesie is a big one.”


Pharaoh’s got mad cattle, but when were they last inspected?
You left ‘em out with God all night, and now they’re all ## adjective.


# {{ Page }}


Moses was now suspended in mid air with both shoes and both socks off and both legs fully outstretched. He started from the outer right toe and worked inward, like a gentile eating a Cadbury creme egg.


From soothing oils, to soothing mohels,
You’ll need every cure there is when your skin erupts with ## noun (plural).


# {{ Page }}


“How many toes do Jews have?” moaned Pharaoh. But Pharaoh was sore afraid, as the toes of the Children of Israel had waxed mighty.


Did we run out of leaven, or is this bread just stale?
Go strap on your helmet, sir, cause when it rains it ## verb, same tense as “goes”.


# {{ Page }}


At this point Moses had so many toes outstretched he was basically upside-down. He did the thing where he reached into his pocket, with his right foot, and said, “Pharaoh, I have something for you....gimme a minute…” and he gave him the middle toe, again, this time with an incantation:


Hocus pocus, focus woke us,
You can’t choke us when you’re swarmed with ## noun (plural)


# {{ Page }}


“You like that? I got ## number strictly larger than two toes left! And THIS little piggy says...”


Wee, wee, wee, I can’t farm, and I can’t see
Egypt was all fertile, but now it’s full of starkness, covered in dead bugs, and in a cloud of ## something that could fill a space.


# {{ Page }}


“Now this is where you need to really make your case,” said God. Moses said, “And this big fucking toe is your dumb dead first born son, all the way home!”


That night the Spirit of Death went door to door, selling ## something sold door-to-door, circulating a petition for ## a local office, like “mayor”, and killing every firstborn of Egypt with ## a handheld object. The firstborn of Israel were exempt, as God had tipped them off and they had labeled their doors with the blood of ## a cute animal.


Do not cry for Pharaoh--he loved it.


# {{ Page }}
Run, Jewish, Run
And after just nine more plagues that we won’t mention here, as they were the really bad ones, the Jews were free. For as long as it took the Egyptians to get their ## vehicles ready. 


“It’s time to make like the sea, and split!” said Moses.


The Egyptians chased after the ## word for Jews, but they weren’t fast enough, or buoyant enough. Our people made it to Israel, Birthright paid for it, and they lived happily ever after.


# {{ Page }}
Dayeinu
God did so much more than the bare minimum required of Her. That’s why we love God--She never phones it in.


If She had merely ## verb or verb phrase (past tense), that would have been perfectly adequate.


Now if She had ## verb or verb phrase (past tense), that would have been awesome.


If She had ## verb or verb phrase (past tense), that would have been phenomenal.


This reminds me of a song.


STAGE DIRECTION: All sing Dayeinu.


אִלּוּ הוֹצִיאָֽנוּ מִמִּצְרַֽיִם, דַּיֵּנוּ:
Ilu hotzianu mi-mitzrayim, Dayeinu
If God had only taken us out of Egypt, that would have been enough!


אִלּוּ נָתַן לָֽנוּ אֶת־הַתּוֹרָה, דַּיֵּנוּ:
Ilu natan lanu et ha-Torah, Dayeinu
If God had only given us the Torah, that would have been enough.


# {{ Page }}
The Passover symbols
STAGE DIRECTION: Hold up the shank bone, or gesture to it.


This, my Jews, is ## a handheld item. It represents a dead lamb. Some would argue it really is a dead lamb.


STAGE DIRECTION: Hold up matzah, or gesture to it.


You all know what this is. You keep it in your pantry, you eat it when there’s absolutely nothing else available, and you secretly love it, you dirty little freak. It’s ## a flat thing. It represents bread, for the busy or enslaved.


STAGE DIRECTION: Hold up maror (horseradish), or gesture to it.


Lastly, but not the last thing before we eat, this is ## a substance. It represents something about slavery and Judaism and Passover and so forth.


# {{ Page }}
Glass of wine, reboot
It is now time for our fifth glass of wine. Wait, second? Damn. This is our second glass of wine. Sing.


STAGE DIRECTION: All who are able sing a special Hallelujah. Others sing a regular Hallelujah.


בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי הַגָּפֶן:
Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, borei p’ree hagafen.
We praise God, Ruler of Everything, who creates the fruit of the vine.


# {{ Page }}
רָחְצWash your hands and get back to work | rachtza 
We will now pantomime washing our hands. We will then pantomime eating the entire meal. We will then eat the meal.


Wash with me. Watch me, and repeat. This is how we wash where I’m from:


STAGE DIRECTION: Pretend to ## do an activity you can do with your hands.


And this is how we pray.


בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ אֱלֹהֵֽינוּ מֶֽלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, אֲשֶׁר קִדְּשָֽׁנוּ בְּמִצְוֹתָיו, וְצִוָּנוּ
 עַל נְטִילַת יָדָֽיִם:
Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, asher kid’shanu b’mitzvotav v’tzivanu
al n’tilat yadayim.


# {{ Page }}
מוֹצִיא מַצָּה Well, bless my little bread  | motzi matzah |
At this point in the seder, it is customary for ## name of someone present to ## do an activity.


STAGE DIRECTION: Look at the named person.


So do it.


Alternatively, you may hold up some matzoh while we all sing to bless this breadless bread.


STAGE DIRECTION: All sing to the held-up matzoh.


בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵֽינוּ מֶֽלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, הַמּוֹצִיא לֶֽחֶם מִן הָאָֽרֶץ:
Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, hamotzi lechem min ha-aretz.
We praise God, Ruler of Everything, who brings bread from the land.
 
בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵֽינוּ מֶֽלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, אֲשֶׁר קִדְּשָֽׁנוּ בְּמִצְוֹתַָיו וְצִוָּֽנוּ עַל אֲכִילַת מַצָּה:
Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, asher kid’shanu b’mitzvotav v’tzivanu
al achilat matzah.
We praise God, Ruler of Everything, who made us holy through obligations, commanding us to eat matzah.


# {{ Page }}
מָרוֹר That’s a spicy Sweetaball! | maror |
We now sing as we spread delicious charoset and religiously-significant (kinda gross) maror on so-gross-it-has-to-be-religiously-significant matzoh. This represents the bittersweetness of doing rituals when you’re hungry. Just dip--do not eat.
 
בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיַָ אֱלֹהֵֽינוּ מֶֽלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, אֲשֶׁר קִדְּשָֽׁנוּ בְּמִצְוֹתָיו וְצִוָּֽנוּ עַל אֲכִילַת מָרוֹר:
Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, asher kid’shanu b’mitzvotav v’tzivanu
al achilat maror.
We praise God, Ruler of Everything, who made us holy through obligations, commanding us to eat bitter herbs.
 
# {{ Page }}
כּוֹרֵךְ Break sandwiches more, ya people, for shit sakes | koreich |
We now eat the sandwich assembled in the previous step, as our ancestors did before us. This sandwich represents how our freedom had too ooze through slices of struggle and persecution, and how our work is never over.


# {{ Page }}
Re-do steps 1 through 14 before the meal
Go to page 1. It’s time to do it all over again!. It is now tradition to re-do the entire Haggadah up to this point, in observation of how our ancestors had to wait a very long time for freedom.


JK.


# {{ Page }}
שֻׁלְחָן עוֹרֵךְ OMG Can we fuckin Eat now!?! | shulchan oreich |


Eat your meal. Report back when you’re done.


# {{ Page }}
בָּרֵךְ Saying grace after the meal and inviting Elijah the Prophet | bareich |
Now that the food is gone, we should invite Elijah the Prophet Who Never Brings Anything. No shade--he’s dead. If anyone has a song they would like to sing, please, sing it now.


# {{ Page }}
The THIRD glass of wine (starting to feel it yet?)
Please have your third glass of wine (we hope you didn’t have any more wine during the dinner), and sing another song.


בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי הַגָּפֶן:
Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, borei p’ree hagafen.
We praise God, Ruler of Everything, who creates the fruit of the vine.


# {{ Page }}
Elijah’s cup. Ghosts like getting drunk, too! 
If the tale of our escape from Egypt teaches us anything, it’s that it’s always safe to open the door and admit magical spirits. So we invited everyone’s favorite ghost, ## dead celebrity. They texted earlier to say they won’t make it, so someone, anyone, tell ## name of a person present to go let Elijah in instead.


We sing the Song of Letting Elijah in the Door.


אֵלִיָּֽהוּ הַנָּבִיא, אֵלִיָּֽהוּ הַתִּשְׁבִּי,
אֵלִיָּֽהוּ, אֵלִיָּֽהוּ,אֵלִיָּֽהוּ הַגִּלְעָדִי.
בִּמְהֵרָה בְיָמֵֽנוּ יָבוֹא אֵלֵֽינוּ
עִם מָשִֽׁיחַ בֶּן דָּוִד,
עִם מָשִֽׁיחַ בֶּן דָּוִד.


Eliyahu hanavi
Eliyahu hatishbi
Eliyahu, Eliyahu, Eliyahu hagiladi
Bimheirah v’yameinu, yavo eileinu
Im mashiach ben-David,
Im mashiach ben-David
Elijah the prophet, the returning,
the man of Gilad:
return to us speedily, in our days with the messiah, son of David.


# {{ Page }}
Miscellaneous praise 
Sing songs of praise to You Know Who, or whoever you want .


# {{ Page }}
Closing rites
The FOURTH glass of wine
As we drink this last cup of wine, we contemplate what we want for this year. As we sing, we praise God, we appreciate one another, and we cherish the time we have together and the memories we create.


בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי הַגָּפֶן:
Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, borei p’ree hagafen.
 
לְשָׁנָה הַבָּאָה בִּירוּשָׁלָֽיִם: 
L’shana haba-ah biy’rushalayim!
Next year in Jerusalem with an app!
 of
