# {{ Page }}
# Mad Liberation: Waiting for Haggadot
###### composed by Seth DiLorenzo, Josh and Rachael Silverbauer, and Doug Naphas


Let’s get a few things out of the way, just to level-set. Let’s all get on the same screen.


First of all, this is not your bubbe’s Haggadah. This is also not your bubbe’s {{ item an old person has // // // Chrysler Town and Country }}. Some things may be shocking. Others will be frustrating. Still more will be {{ adjective // // This is __ // uplifting }}.


Literally no one in the world is experiencing the very same seder that we are. Nor will anyone again. This gathering, tonight, is like {{ something that only happens once // // // the Cretaceous–Paleogene_extinction_event }}. Except we’ll actually enjoy it.
# {{ Page }}
By the end of this celebration, you will be like a free Jew, and you know how Jews love free things (but not in an offensive way). I myself love {{ something free // // I got __ // stolen train rides }}.


Imagine yourself baked into crisp matzah. Split into two pieces. Hidden. Found. Dipped, in saltwater. Washed, in preparation for the seder. Washed again, in preparation for the meal. Washed after the meal.


Eaten, like a meal. Washed down, with four glasses of wine. Thrown up, after four more. Thrown out of Egypt. Called back. Finally freed.


Anyway, let’s go over the agenda. We are going, in order, to:


קַדֵּשׁ Bless that wine | kadeish |
וּרְחַץ Wash those hands | urchatz |
כַּרְפַּס Dip those greens | karpas |
יַחַץ Break that matzah | yachatz |
מַגִּידTell that story | magid |
רָחְצָה Re-wash those hands | rachtza |
מוֹצִיא מַצָּה Bless that food | motzi matzah |
מוֹצִיא מַצָּה Re-bless that food | motzi matzah |
מָרוֹר Sweeten those herbs | maror |
כּוֹרֵךְ Make that sandwich | koreich |
שֻׁלְחָן עוֹרֵךְ Eat that meal | shulchan oreich |
צָפוּן Find that afikoman | tzafoon |
בָּרֵךְ Invite that Prophet | bareich |
הַלֵּל Praise that God | hallel |
נִרְצָה Imagine that future | nirtzah |
מילצוש {{ Positive transitive verb // // I am going to __ that thing // Buy }} that {{ positive thing // //  // trophy of my affection }} |.{{ a made-up Hebrew word // hirpapv // __ // basusin }} |


Let’s Jew this.
# {{ Page }}
## Kiddush will be kiddush | kadeish
It is tradition, indeed, it is a mitzvah, to conduct pieces of our seder in the ancient language of {{ a made-up language // Frianche // I speak __ // Getonyanese}}, which was in fact spoken by the Children of Israel when they were slaves in Egypt. For those not familiar, it sounds like this:
    {{ One phlegmy syllable (not a real word) // haechgh // // blech}} {{ two phlegmy syllables (not a real word) // bi-bachgh // // vi-vlecht}} {{ One phlegmy syllable (not a real word) // haechgh // // vlicht}} {{ three phlegmy syllables (not a real word) // ghamagheef // // gamaschische}} {{ One syllable (not a real word) // ur // // mi}} {{ One phlegmy syllable (not a real word) // haechgh // // mecht}} {{ three phlegmy syllables (not a real word) // ghamagheef // // vaganeeghth}}


As a secondary language, many Jews also spoke Hebrew. Much like today.


Hebrew, for its part, sounds more like this:


    בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי הַגָּפֶן:
    Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, borei p’ree hagafen.


    בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם,
 שֶׁהֶחֱיָנוּ וְקִיְּמָנוּ וְהִגִּיעָנוּ לַזְּמַן הַזֶּה:    
    Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam,
    she-hechiyanu v’key’manu v’higiyanu lazman hazeh.


Thank you.


The prayer we just prayed thanks God for {{ a transitive culinary verb // grating // The cook is __ // squeezing }} the sacred and holy {{ fruits with characteristics // malicious melons // a bowl of __ // quiescent quinces }} to make sweet wine. This wine symbolizes how sweet it is to be free from slavery, and how much more likely we are as free persons to {{ thing you enjoy doing by yourself // walk around naked // I like to __ // burp into my dog’s mouth}}. 


Be free, be sweet, be thirsty, and fill the cup of the person to your {{ left or right // left // You are to my __ // left }}.
# {{ Page }}
## You better wash yourself | urchatz


Your hands have certainly gotten dirty sitting here all this time, especially if you’ve been {{ doing something gross //   // I was __ // slinging mud }}. So we have to cleanse them. Now. Right now. Please, for everyone’s sake.


Even washing our hands is something to be grateful for--slaves in Egypt could only wash themselves every {{ integer greater than 1 // 27 // __ > 1 // 500 }}  days.


However, because we are free, we are going to exclaim loudly, together, the sacred phrase of our ancient rabbis. Here is how we shall proceed.


1. I will exclaim something.
2. You will listen to it.
3. {{ Someone here tonight // // __ is here tonight // I }} will {{ take an inappropriate action // .burp // He will __ // kvetch }}
4. You will repeat the sacred phrase.
5. I will pantomime the action described by the sacred phrase, which is as yet unknown to me.
6. You will all follow in my pantomime.


And now, without further ado, the sacred, cleansing phrase:


“{{ something you get scolded to do // do the dishes //  You have to __! // wash between your toes }}!”


We’re all clean! We can begin to commence thinking about maybe starting to ponder having dinner. 
# {{ Page }}
## Gratitude Interlude
Let’s take a pause from this busy schedule to reflect on what is meaningful in our lives. We are going to go around the room and share in 30 seconds or less. I’ll go first. Then we’ll go {{ clockwise or counterclockwise // clockwise // We will go __ // counterclockwise }}.


[[ Go around the table as stated, saying something about what is meaningful in your life, if you are moved to do so. ]]


And that was it. That was my turn.
# {{ Page }}
## When I dip, you dip, we dip a green vegetable in saltwater | karpas


And we begin with the Hebrew again:




    בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי הָאֲדָמָה:
    Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, borei p’ree ha-adama.
    We praise God, Ruler of Everything, who creates the fruits of the earth.


For the unknowing, be it now known that the great Muppet {{ crazy name// Laserface // This is  __ // Barko }} the {{ animal // giraffe // This is a(n)  __ // goat }} said, “It’s not easy eating greens,” especially when they’re dipped in saltwater. Yet we must. Why?


Be it known also, that according to scripture, Rabbi {{ a capitalized word, any capitalized word //  Bucket  // “__” is definitely a word // Dragon }} Bergenstein was sitting in a meadow one spring morning and pronounced:


[To the tune of “Tears on My Pillow” from Grease. If you don’t know it, make it up.]


    Tears on my parsley
    {{ negative emotion // sadness// __ // consternation }}, in my
    {{ organ // heart // __ // spleen }},
    Felt by Jews
    Oo - oo - ooo - oooo - ooooooo


And that is why we dip our green vegetable in saltwater:  to enhance the flavor of our suffering.
# {{ Page }}
## It's time for a matzah break! | yachatz


Look at all this sumptuous matzah before us. Everyone, seriously look. Imagine yourself eating it. Seriously, everyone: imagine. That’s all you get to do, because we’re not eating now. 


We’re breaking. 


Someone locate the piles of matzah on the table. They could be resting under a napkin, inside your grandma’s lacquered matzah box, or hiding in {{ person or people in this room and something that belongs to them // Josh’s Lunchbox  // this is  __ // Michael’s mouth }}. When the moment comes, I will assign someone to take the middle matzah from this pile and to rend it in two. The larger half (how can one half be larger? This might be the 5th question!) shall be passed to me. I will {{ adverb // hungrily //  do it  __ // wretchedly}} hide this bounty as the afikomen, which literally translates to: gift of the {{ adjective // lovely //  a(n)  __ thing // flimsy }}  {{ thing // grocery bag //  this is a(n)  __ // kumquat}}.


We hide the larger half because more is hidden than is revealed.


After dinner, all you guests will have to hunt for this afikomen  and win a prize. What could it be? A trip to {{ very descriptive place // the most fly-ridden dump in Kansas  // going to __ // the gates of Hell }}?  An annuity payment of {{ small number that is not one // two // __  // three }}  shekels in your bank account over the next {{ number greater than ten // three-hundred and four // __  // seventy }} {{ units of time // years // __  // minutes }}? You get to pick! 


Remember the greatest rabbinical maxim: “a good thing will come to ye who search for it”. 


At last, our moment has come. There is no blessing. There is no curse. There is just the snapping of the unleavened bread...Go!




# {{ Page }}
## Pre-magid
Have you ever wondered why you are not a slave today? Have you ever wondered why, instead of {{ transitive verb // punishing   // you are __ it // licking }} your master’s {{ thing // bagel  // the __  // horseshoes}} every day, you get to do whatever you please, as long as you’re working?


The reason for your freedom lies in this holy tale. It is a hymn of {{ characteristic or emotion // courage  // a person of great __  // dignity}} and {{ characteristic or emotion // courage  // a person of great __   // nudity }}, of how the hero of the Hebrews risked everything to free everyone, with nothing but his mighty staff and a little help from an omnipotent friend. And it begins shortly. 


But before we begin anything, we must always think of the children, for we were children once and were thought over...


...and speaking of kids...they say the darndest things, am I right? Especially when they are forced to say things in Hebrew. Last year, at Passover, some kid asked, {{ a dumb question // Is the moon made of cheese? //  __ ? // What happens if I fall into my belly button? }}? Isn’t that the darndest? Good thing we don’t have any kids here tonight. 


[[ Identify the youngest person at the seder, and pass the reading device to them. ]]
# {{ Page: To Youngest }}
Ahem.


# {{ Page: From Youngest }}
Didn’t see you there! You are so small! Well, since you’re here, we might as well put you to work. Now, almost all of us know the entire history of {{ holiday or great day //passover // we celebrate  __ // St Patrick’s Day }} but I’m sure this {{ immature insult you’d use to insult a kid// bubble butt //you are a ____//fish vomit stick}} has some questions about it. 


Let us hear from that person here who is the FURTHEST in age from Israel. 
# {{ Page: To Youngest }}
Thank you family. First off let me say that I am not uneducated. In fact, I was the one who first theorized the {{a name of a made up theory// the scientific month//Edison thought of the___ theory//Flabby Billy Theory}} theory. 


But I do have some questions. And when I have questions, I like to sing them in perfect Hebrew.  




    מַה נִּשְׁתַּנָּה הַלַּֽיְלָה הַזֶּה מִכָּל הַלֵּילוֹת?
    Ma nishtana halaila hazeh mikol haleilot?


שֶׁבְּכָל הַלֵּילוֹת אָֽנוּ אוֹכְלִין חָמֵץ וּמַצָּה. הַלַּֽיְלָה הַזֶּה כֻּלּוֹ מַצָּה:    
    Shebichol haleilot anu ochlin chameitz u-matzah. Halaila
    hazeh kulo matzah.


    שֶׁבְּכָל הַלֵּילוֹת אָֽנוּ אוֹכְלִין שְׁאָר יְרָקוֹת הַלַּֽיְלָה הַזֶּה מָרוֹר:    
    Shebichol haleilot anu ochlin shi’ar yirakot. Halaila hazeh
    Maror.


    בְּכָל הַלֵּילוֹת אֵין אָֽנוּ מַטְבִּילִין אֲפִילוּ פַּֽעַם אֶחָת.
 הַלַּֽיְלָה הַזֶּה שְׁתֵּי פְעָמִים:
    Shebichol haleilot ain anu matbilin afilu pa-am echat. Halaila hazeh shtei pa-amim.


    שֶׁבְּכָל הַלֵּילוֹת אָֽנוּ אוֹכְלִין בֵּין יוֹשְׁבִין וּבֵין מְסֻבִּין.
     הַלַּֽיְלָה הַזֶּה כֻּלָּֽנוּ מְסֻבִּין:
    Shebichol haleilot anu ochlin bein yoshvin uvein m’subin.
    Halaila hazeh kulanu m’subin.


I know you’re all as old as  {{something old // A dinosaur // My grandpa is as old as ____ // Stonehenge}}and might not speak Hebrew, so I’ll translate that for you.


I said, why is this night different from all other nights? I mean, I usually do the exact same thing every night, specifically, I {{ weird ritual you might do // brush my teeth with a pencil // Every night, I ____// gargle coffee to the tune of “Row, Row, Row Your Boat”}}, every night, but tonight, I’m here with you. Why?
# {{ Page: From Youngest }}
Different how? Like apples and {{ plural noun // killer whales // Those are ____! // boogers}}? Can you be more specific? 


# {{ Page: To Youngest }}
Well, for instance, on all other nights I eat leavened bread and {{type of food//apple pie//I love to eat ____!//flan}}, but tonight I’m only eating matzah. And like nine other courses. Why?


# {{ Page: From Youngest }}
Have you ever tried to build pyramids while eating three square meals a day? I don’t think so! Our slave ancestors ate matzah because they had no time to {{ action that doesn’t take a long time // sneeze // Some people can ____ in five seconds. // put on socks }}, let alone wait for yeast to rise. What’s your next question, {{ term of endearment // sweet potato // I call my husband ____. // sugar lumpkin }}?
# {{ Page: To Youngest }}
On every other night I eat tons of vegetables. TONS. Here are a few of the vegetables I eat daily: {{ a vegetable with a characteristic // beautiful broccoli // // gooey green beans }}, {{  vegetables with characteristics // puny potatoes // // petite peas }}, and {{ vegetables with unusual characteristics // placid parsnips // // cabalistic cabbage }}. But tonight I’m only eating bitter herbs! Why?
# {{ Page: From Youngest }}
Well, you see little young one, this one time, we were slaves, and being a slave is very {{ word for disgusting // putrid // That old milk smells ___! // horrible }}, just like bitter herbs. Not like vegetables though...which are delightful.  


# {{ Page: To Youngest }}
Speaking of vegetables, why on this night do I dip my vegetables not just once but  {{ large number// 349 // He counted up to  ____!// 3958}} times. That’s so many times! 
# {{ Page: From Youngest }}
It’s just twice. But yes. On this night we dip twice because our ancestors were slaves, and that’s sad. So we dip in salt water, which represents their tears. Also because dipping is luxurious, like {{luxurious activity // being fed grapes // When I want to feel fancy, I spend my days  ____. // bathing in gold coins}}, so there is that. 


# {{ Page: To Youngest }}
Ok last question. I promise. On all other nights I don’t recline. I sit up as straight as a {{stiff object // board // stiff as a ___ // wall}}. Why on this night do I get to recline on a {{ soft object // pillow // soft as a ___ // fluffy bed}}?


# {{ Page: From Youngest }}




It’s because we’re FREE. You see we can do anything we want now. I can go into a deli and {{ Activity you’d do if there were no laws // rob a bank // If you ___, you will go to jail. // moon a diner waiter }} now. And so can you! And that’s the underlying message here.


Anyway, thank you, youngest person here, for your astute questions. You may go to bed.
# {{ Page }}
## Pre-Magid 2: the Four Sons
Perhaps you have heard of the Four Sons. Perhaps you think you know a thing or two about them. Perhaps you learned their story in {{ a place where you can learn things // the library // I learned that in __  // my neighbor’s basement }}.


Everything you know is wrong. About everything.


But I can only teach you about the sons. 


The first piece of groundbreaking information I can share about the sons is that there are four of them. Which I guess you already knew back when you were misinformed about the sons, so that one thing was true.


Other than that, {{ something you say when you don’t know what to say // um….err... // __ .... // Uhhhhh……...ummmmmm….. }} ...


# {{ Page }}
### The Wise Son 
Excuse me, but I am the wisest of sons. And sons are the wisest of children. So please allow me to mansplain all about the Four Sons.


And by, “Please allow me to,” I mean, “I am going to, no matter what you want.”


Jews learn from questions. It’s what makes us unique. Everyone else learns by {{ doing something that definitely does not teach you anything // // We are __. // skipping school }}.


The purpose of the Four Sons is to ask the questions that will inform all persons here who are less knowledgeable than me. Which is all of you.


My question is the greatest. It is the question after which all questions are modeled. It is {{ a paragon (a perfect example of something) // the Mona Lisa // // the Louvre }} of questions. And here it is:


{{ Something you’d be embarrassed to ask // What is water? // // Is it bad if my poop is yellow? }}
# {{ Page }}
### The Wise Answer
I think what you’re trying to say is, “What are the testimonials, statutes, and laws God has commanded us?”


Well, the prime testimonial is that we were slaves in Egypt and that means you should follow all the laws of Passover, including skipping dessert after dinner. It’s true. There’s no law on the amount of matzah you can have, though. Here is a synopsis of all of God’s highly relevant Biblical commands:
#### Chukim
These are known as the Inexplicable Laws, like “don’t mix wool with linen” and, “ {{ A weird piece of advice // Don’t put BBQ sauce in your pants // __ // Always sit on the butter before you eat it }}.”


#### Edot
These are the Explicable-But-Not-Intuitive Laws, like celebrating Shabbat, Festivals, and Rites of Passage, such as {{ something a kid learns to do growing up // riding a bicycle // __ is something I remember // the first time eating solid food }}.


#### Mishpatim
These are the Intuitive Laws, like don’t get caught stealing or  {{ something you’d probably get in trouble for if you were caught by your parents // watching too much TV // I got grounded for__ // punching your brother in his private parts}}.


Now, let me keep explaining...
# {{ Page }}
### The Wicked Son
Shut up! Stop talking. Where you do get off thinking you know everything?


Let me tell you what I get off on. I’m the Wicked Son and I get off on tangents.


What kind of tangents? Is that your question? All kinds of tangents. Mathematical tangents. Tan gents tanning at the beach. {{ A highly, highly, strange concept // gorillas doing Shakespeare on the Moon // // Dogs giving birth to cows }}. Anything unrelated to whatever’s happening.


Particularly whatever’s happening here, tonight. I don’t know what any of this is or how I got here, but I hate it.


And what’s up with these so called “commands?”  Who are you, {{ someone who gives commands // the commander // // Mom }}? If the commands are soooooo righteous, why am I forced to sit here and eat gefilte fish or wear this tight yarmulke?  And, like why do i have to {{ A complaint in present tense // go to school today // He was annoyed because he had to ____ // take my grandmother to church}} tonight?  What does all this mean to YOU?! 
# {{ Page }}
### The Wicked Answer
It means whatever God says it means!


Wicked Son, I blunt your teeth. I wish we never invited you, you are the worst of the children. You are worse than {{ A horrible person from history // Ghangis Khan // __ was a terrible person // Haman}}. But I’m still happy you’re here, in the broadest sense.


So I guess that, in a way, is an answer.


Let’s move on to the Simple Son.
# {{ Page }}
### The Simple Son


So, like, I have a pretty simple question.


{{ An extremely basic, fundamental question // // // What is this? }}


[[ Stage direction (don’t read this): Pretend you’re handing the Seder device to the next person, then don’t. ]]


I’m sorry, let me take that back. That question and that reading device. That was a(n) {{ negative adjective // bad // // idiotic}} question. I’ll try again. 


{{ A very straightforward question // // // Why do we do this? }}


So, yeah, that was it. Simple question. And let me guess...the answer is, “We already heard the answer?” I usually get that...


I’m kinda like the plain pasta of sons. The {{ plain food // graham cracker // I am eating __  // yogurt}}, the matzah of sons, as it were.


Actually, even that’s too complicated. I’m a cup of white flour, scooped and eaten right out of the bag.


But if you think I’m dumb, wait til you hear from my little brother. We call him The Son Who Knows Not How To Ask.


Take it away, genius.
# {{ Page }}
### The Son Who Knows Not How to Ask


#### Grib hiksy fan
Ha ray behray tel ab et terrah. Tree weldicans, sming diggle {{ gibberish phrase // geng di boot wumph //  // gleg shifty tarley memdi katch ingoo}}. Schlups? SCHLUPS??? Fem benna ben, renna ren {{ US State // Maine // the great state of __ // New Mexico}} hen shakey.


##### Rik firf nerf shlipsy fango
Zing wish flooby? Helta cling {{ character in book or movie // Peter Pan // // Cinderella}} fish mish da lish!


#### Crybal mirk
Bander tots slursham say. Murph the ganders with the {{ adjective 3 syllables or longer // retrospective // // intermittent}} flub?  Doo hicken...Passover!




# {{ Page }}
## Meta-Dayeinu
Why, that’s the best question I’ve heard all night, and there have been a LOT of questions. 


If I had heard from just the first of this obnoxious family of all sons, that would have been enough. 


If we had stopped after the second son, that would have been quite enough. Quite.


If we were to just stop reading the Haggadah right now, eat, and skip the 83 sections we have left, go home, and {{ do something you do at home // nap // // binge }}, that would be enough for us.


For our ancestors, though, long, long ago in the land of Egypt, it was never enough.


No, no, our ancestors may have started as Four Sons. But those sons met Four Daughters. They got to know each other.


They multiplied. I don’t know a polite way to explain how this happened, but suffice it to say that it involved mommies and daddies, {{ items used by people who love each other // // // wedding cakes }}, {{ items used by people who hate each other // // // battle axes }}, and more than four glasses of wine.


Let’s pour out, but not drink up, some wine in honor of our multiplying ancestors, even the ones here with us tonight. So pour yourself some sederade, and sing a little song about how we used to be slaves.


בָדִים הָיִינוּ הָיִינוּ. עַתָּה בְּנֵי חוֹרִין:
Avadim hayinu. Ata b’nei chorin.


So maybe next year we should listen to the Four Daughters.
# {{ Page }}
## The Mad Liberation | magid
We’ve come to the part of the Seder where we move away from questions and start getting answers. As is the tradition of Passover, we begin by reading the entire book of Exodus. You think I’m kidding. Everyone please take out your Torahs.


While you are doing that, I’ll set the scene. It’s Egypt. It’s long ago. Jews are numerous. Jews are not yet slaves.


We can skip to page {{large number // 9837 // // 9308 }} where the story gets truly {{ adjective // jolly // // riveting }}. 


Once upon a time there lived a Pharaoh named {{Very long and complicated name // Tikki Tikki Tembo No Sarimbo Hari Kari Bushkie Perry Pem Do Hai Kai Pom Pom Nikki No Meeno Dom Barako. // They called him____ //  Hubert Blaine Wolfeschlegelsteinhausenbergerdorff, Sr.}} but that was too complicated, so mostly the people just referred to him as “Pharaoh.”


One day, on his daily walk to {{ geographic landmark // the Great Barrier Reef // he went to __ // Mount Rushmore}}, Pharaoh looked around and sneered, “There are so many Jews around here!  Pretty soon the lines at {{ place that is fun to go to // Six Flags  // we enjoyed going to ___ // IKEA }} will be too damn long.” Seeing a way to avert his grave problem, Pharaoh declared all Jews to be his slaves and that they should spend the rest of eternity {{ undertaking a massive project // building the Great Wall of China  // they focused on ___ // terraforming Mars}}. To control their numbers, he ordered all Jewish sons be tossed into {{ body of water // the Atlantic Ocean //  __ is a body of water // Lake Michigan}}. “I call it,” he mused to his Council, “the Game of Thrown.”


# {{ Page }}
## Guns ‘n’ Moses
Some Jews were just not having this. One Jewish mother sent her newborn baby, randomly named Moses, down the Nile river to save his life. “You’ll thank me later,” she called after him. 
Pharoah’s own {{ important person in one’s life // daughter // This is my __ // girlfriend}} discovered the baby and raised it right under his royal nose.


Skip 20 years, and Moses is a hip young millennial, discovering his Jewish roots and being super annoying about it. How did he first know he was Jewish, you ask? What did I tell you about questions? I don’t know, maybe it was the tingling sensation he felt when he first {{ very Jewish thing to do (past tense) // cooked latkes in synagogue // He __ // rocked out to Yentl }}. 


One day, on a leisurely stroll through the {{ gross place // // They are in the __ // mud pits}}, he witnessed an Egyptian man teasing a Jewish slave. The Egyptian said to the Jewish man, “{{ Immature insult // You’re ugly, stupid // He said to him, “ ___ “ // Your breath stinks }}.”


Moses knew what to do. He smashed the Egytian’s head with a(n) {{ very large item // boulder // a __  // refrigerator }}. Knowing his good intentions would be misunderstood, Moses decided to flee Egypt.
# {{ Page }}
## Easter’s coming, so save our peeps!
Moses spent the ensuing decades as a care-free {{ obscure occupation // phantom toll-booth attendant // She was a(n) ____// liontamer}} in the land of Midian. One day, while ambling near the local shrubs, he noticed that one was on fire, and that the fire could talk.


“I have a burning question,” the flame said. “And I’ll ask it the way I, God, always ask questions: with a command. I order you to liberate the {{ fictional race // hobbits // long ago lived an ancient race of ____ // fishpeople}} of {{ a geographic location // China //  __ is a location in the world// Burma }}, and then, when you finish that, to free the Jews.”


Moses said to God, “My skills mostly lie in {{ a strange area of skill // // … is skilled in __. // balancing things on other things }}. Am I really, like, the best person for this job?”


“Hell, no,” said God. “But Noah’s been avoiding me since the last thing I made him do, and you’re the first person I ran into. Don’t worry, I’ve got some {{ positive adjective // // // sick }} tools to help you out.”


# {{ Page }}
## God’s plague-ground
Moses returned to Egypt, ready to rumble. 


He ascended the royal staircase, pushed open the royal door, and wagged his staff in Pharaoh's royal face. “Let my people {{ intransitive verb, positive connotation  // pop // it likes to ___ // jiggle }}, freely.”


“What?” said Pharaoh with a yawn.


Vanquished, Moses shrank back and prepared to tell God that the task was impossible. God opened a channel of communication with Moses as only God finds convenient, by setting his {{ item needed to travel // travel toothbrush // // suitcase}} on fire, and speaking from the flames. “Go back and tell him he is messing with the wrong deity! In fact, he’s messing with the only deity! And it’s the wrong one.”
# {{ Page }}
### Blood | dam
Moses returned to the palace, ready to re-rumble. 


He ascended the royal staircase, pushed open the royal door, and wagged his staff in Pharaoh's royal face. “Let my people {{ intransitive verb, positive connotation  // dance // it likes to ___ // twerk }}, freely.”


Pharaoh muttered something incoherently as he ate his cereal.


Crushed, Moses turned all the liquids in Egypt into blood. Even the liquids that were already blood.


Unfazed, Pharaoh poured some blood from his {{ fancy piece of dishware // pitcher // I have a __ // desktop carafe }} into his bowl, kept eating, and kept enslaving.




# {{ Page }}
### Frogs | tzfardeiya
Moses re-returned to the palace, ready to re-re-rumble, more confident than ever.


He re-ascended the royal staircase, re-pushed open the royal door, and re-wagged his staff in Pharaoh's royal face. “Let my people {{ intransitive verb, positive connotation  // contemplate // it likes to ___ // kneel }}, in a free way.”


“Do you have an appointment?” asked Pharoah dismissively.


“Who are you, {{ someone who takes appointments // a doctor // // Dr. Evil }}?” said Moses, “I am appointed by God, who will smite thee into submission, visiting upon thee…”


“No,” said Pharaoh.


Dejected, Moses had God call all the frogs of the world to take up residence in the land of Egypt. They nested in pillows, in pots, and in the people’s {{ articles of clothing  // shirts // People wear ___ // underwear}}.


“Why is this bad?” asked Pharoah. “I love frogs.” Pharaoh crouched down and started acting like a frog, hopping around the palace, eating flies, nesting in pillows, breathing through his skin, and {{ doing something frogs do // // // biologically switching genders in times of low reproduction }}. People who knew him said he had never been happier.
# {{ Page }}
### Lice | kinim


Moses re-re-returned again to the palace, re-ready to re-re-re-rumble once more.


“Do you come bearing more gifts for me?” asked Pharoah sweetly.


“No,” said Moses, “Let my people go, or else...”


“What? You’ll turn every particle of sand in this desert into lice that will burrow into my skin and fill my mouth to the point where I can’t {{ do something you do with your mouth // talk // I will __. // blow up a balloon }}?”


Moses said, “Exactly.”


Pharoah {{ something one did excitedly  // stood up and clapped // it was so good she ___ // giggled ferociously}} “Excellent! I’ve been asking my wife to arrange that for me since our honeymoon, but she always gives me {{ an unwanted gift from one spouse to another // // // worn socks }}. Thank you!”


Moses and God decided to try the exact same thing in a slightly different way.


# {{ Page }}
### Wild Animals | arov


Moses once again re-re-re-returned afresh to the same palace as before, re-re-ready to re-re-re-re-rumble once re-more anew.


This time Moses caught Pharaoh in the royal {{ room(s) in or around a palace  // kitchens  // the __ // shipyard }}. “Be fair, oh. Just let ‘em go!” Moses petitioned. 


Pharaoh casually {{ did something one does when bored (past tense) // bit his nails // // spun a dreidel }} while Moses talked, and when he was finished, started biting Moses’s nails.


Pretty sure this wasn’t going anywhere, Moses summoned elephant-sized {{ animals with characteristics  // pensive pandas //  // preoccupied pygmy marmosets }} , {{ animals with characteristics  // gorgeous gorillas //  // porcine porcupines }}, and {{ animals with characteristics  // meddlesome meerkats //  // obtuse octopuses }} to roam the streets.


“Thank this GOD of yours,” Pharaoh said, slapping Moses on the back. “This will free up my zookeepers to work as slaves!”


Moses knew he and God needed to try yet another version of this very same tactic.
# {{ Page }}
### Cattle Disease | dever
Moses was getting impatient. He decided to surprise Pharoah in the {{ place in or around a house // bedroom //  // shower }}.


“Boo! Gonna let them go?” Moses inquired


“Don’t know what you’re talking about,” Pharaoh responded.


“Cattle Disease, then.” Moses said sharply. “Cattle disease.”


Pharaoh was later visited by the royal butcher. “My lord, a great tragedy has befallen our herds! Every cow in the land came down with {{ an old-time disease // dyptheria // came down with__ // syphilis}} this morning and their bones have turned into {{ something soft // pillows // soft as __ // oatmeal}}. Oh, what sorrow!” 


Pharaoh shrugged. “I feel bad for the cattle and all, but...I’ve been a vegetarian for years. Now I can finally have some guilt-free meat. And I can dress myself head to toe in guilt-free leather, tanned and tailored by guilt-free slaves. What’s Moses gonna do next, make me {{ go on a fad diet // give up carbs // I am going to __. // do a Master Cleanse }}?”
# {{ Page }}
### Boils | scheen
Moses and God decided to up their game. They already knew what Pharaoh was going to say the next day, so they planned a pre-emptive strike. 


“If a pox on your heffers moved you not to free the Jews, perhaps a pox on your people will,” Moses chanted.


The people erupted in boils.


Pharoah coyly said, “You know, I’ve never told anyone this, but I have quite a thing for boils. I just like how they look, so round and full of potential. Servants, come and dance for me, that I may admire your boils. Do the {{ named dance // Irish jig // Do the __. // twerk }}. You’re like a boil band! I’ll call you {{ a name for a boy band // // // Five Guys }}. Don’t cover up--I want to see every boil. No bandages. Let’s play a game: everyone pair off and hug each other until your boils rupture. The last one with a fully intact boil wins {{ a prize that involves a lot of physical contact //  // You win __. // a massage }}.


“But the real winner,” concluded Pharaoh, “is me. Thank you, Moses. Thank you.”
# {{ Page }}
### Hail | barad
When Pharaoh strode confidently the next morning into the {{ part of a palace // // She is in the __. // Greater Hall }}, the people cried out, “All hail, Pharaoh!”


“Indeed, all hail me, the great Pharaoh!”


“No,” the people explained. “It’s all hail out there, Pharaoh. The whole kingdom is covered in three feet of hail.”


“It’s raining hail! Hail-e-lujah!” said Pharaoh. “Hail is much better than rain. I hate rain. Avoiding rain is the reason I moved to Egypt from {{ a rainy place // // She is from __. // the rainforest }}. And it’s still too rainy here. At least the hail piles up on the ground, and cleaning it up gives the slaves something to do. Which reminds me: I’m gonna need some more slaves. Tell the Hebrews to start breeding again, but to stay slaves.”
# {{ Page }}
### Locusts | arbeh
“Ok,” said God unto Moses. “You don’t seem to be getting the point across. Why didn’t you tell me you were slow of speech, and not eloquent like {{ someone who is eloquent // // // the host of The Price is Right }}, and you would have a hard time communicating to Pharaoh the value of not being plagued by plagues all the time?”


“I have an idea,” Moses said slowly. “Why don’t you come with me to announce the next plague?”


And God said, “Great idea! I’ll accompany you into town in the form of a raging fire located on your {{ article of clothing // vest // I am wearing my __. // shoes }}.”


When Pharaoh claimed {{ an excuse for not showing up to a meeting (3rd person) // // He didn’t show up because __ . // he was cleaning his bookbags }} and didn’t show up to the meeting, God responded with locusts. They crawled all over everything in the kingdom, even more so than the frogs, and ate every scrap of hail that was left on the ground, which by this time was the Egyptians’ only form of sustenance.


“My Lord, the people are starving, there is no more hail,” complained whoever, and Pharaoh decreed, “Let them eat locusts,” and this actually brilliant strategy rid the land of locusts and fed the nation for a generation. “If it hadn’t been for the locusts,” mused Pharaoh, “I couldn’t even have afforded to feed all my natural-born citizens, and I would’ve had to free the slaves.”
# {{ Page }}
### Darkness | choshech
Pharaoh woke up the next morning with a guilt migraine. And a(n) {{ negative emotion // // // conscience }} hangover. And a(n) {{ negative emotion // // // disgust }} {{ physical ailment // // He is suffering from a(n) __ // nosebleed }}.


“Is it wrong to enslave people?” Pharaoh asked {{ a wise character from literature // // // Gandalf }}.


“Indeed, my liege,” advised the vizier, who was actually Moses in disguise, “I advise you to free the slaves. Please sign the following notarized legal document, which I happen to be carrying, and which states:


    “At sunrise tomorrow, or within a period not to exceed two days thereafter, the Jews are to be set free, thanks to the heroic efforts of Moses.”


Meanwhile, God had independently decided to invite the popular Egyptian sun god Ra to a three-day {{ long celebratory event // // ...going to a __ // Burning Man }} event, thus preventing the sun from rising for exactly three days in Egypt and Egypt only.


Exasperated, Moses asked God, “why didn’t you let me know you would leave me with this darkness during the window when my document was in effect?”


“Oh, I need to clear stuff with you now?” asked God sarcastically. “Maybe we should write a whole thousand page book setting forth Moses’s statutes, and about how Moses {{ did something God did // flooded the Earth for 40 days  // God __. // created the world }}, and how everyone has to {{ perform a religious observance // eat kosher // I have to __ // have Bat Mitzvahs }} for Moses.”
# {{ Page }}
### Slaying of the First Born | makat Bechorot
Losing patience with Moses, God decided to personally go house to house, door to door, trying to hire another prophet.


When that didn’t work, God decided to personally go house to house, door to door, selling {{ something you sell door to door //  //  // doors }}.


When that didn’t work, God decided to personally go house to house, door to door, and kill the first-born in each family with {{ a weapon // // I have __ // an adz }}.


The Jews were exempt, as they had been tipped off to God’s rampage, and had indicated their Jewishness by slaughtering lambs and painting their doors with lamb’s blood, to prove they had slaughtered lambs.


All Jewish people thus had their first-borns’ mercifully spared by the great act of slaughtering lambs, and the Jewish people celebrated by saying, “{{ a word of celebration // // // huzzah }}.” The Jewish sheep, though, having their first-born splattered on every door, pretty much broke even on the deal.


Moses said to Pharaoh: “That was the last and most terrible of all plagues. Do you surrender? Will you free the Jews now that God is all out of bad things to do to you?


Pharaoh responded: “Last plague? Sure, I guess I don’t need the Jews any more. I was only keeping them enslaved so I could keep those plagues coming.


“So get out of Egypt!” Pharaoh told the Jews. “But I have new slaves coming in twenty minutes, so you all need to be out of here right away. There’s no time to bake bread, even though that’s normally what you do before you leave to go somewhere.”


So Moses and the Jews departed Egypt towards freedom. Moses split the Red Sea in two to impress his {{ significant person in your life // mom //  // girlfriend }} & the Jews lived happily ever after in the middle of the ocean.
# {{ Page }}
## Dayeinu
In freeing us Jews, one could say that God did so much more than the bare minimum required. God may have over-achieved.


If God had merely  {{verbed (past tense) a noun // funneled a beer // he once ___ // sat on a toilet}}, that would have been perfectly adequate.


Now if God had  {{verbed (past tense) a noun // baked a cake // he once ___ // picked his nose}}, that would have been satisfactory.


If God had  {{verbed (past tense) a noun // bit his tongue // he once ___ // farmed some vegetables}}, that would’ve worked, too.


This reminds me of a song.


[[ STAGE DIRECTION: All sing Dayeinu. ]]


אִלּוּ הוֹצִיאָֽנוּ מִמִּצְרַֽיִם, דַּיֵּנוּ:
Ilu hotzianu mi-mitzrayim, Dayeinu
If God had only taken us out of Egypt, that would have been enough!


אִלּוּ נָתַן לָֽנוּ אֶת־הַתּוֹרָה, דַּיֵּנוּ:
Ilu natan lanu et ha-Torah, Dayeinu
If God had only given us the Torah, that would have been enough.






אִלּוּ הוֹצִיאָֽנוּ מִמִּצְרַֽיִם, דַּיֵּנוּ:
Ilu hotzianu mi-mitzrayim, Dayeinu
If God had only taken us out of Egypt, that would have been enough!


אִלּוּ נָתַן לָֽנוּ אֶת־הַתּוֹרָה, דַּיֵּנוּ:
Ilu natan lanu et ha-Torah, Dayeinu
If God had only given us the Torah, that would have been enough.




# {{ Page }}
## The Passover symbols
[[ STAGE DIRECTION: Hold up the shank bone, or gesture to it. ]]


This, my Jews, is a {{handheld item// coffee cup// I am holding a ___// digital watch}}. It represents a dead lamb. Some would argue it really is a dead lamb. This dead little lamb saved us from a vengeful killing spree. Let us always pass it over from generation to generation.


[[ STAGE DIRECTION: Hold up matzah, or gesture to it. ]]


You all know what this is. You keep it in your pantry, you eat it when there’s absolutely nothing else available. It’s a  {{flat thing// land// The earth is as flat as a___// carpet}}. It represents bread for the busy or for the-recently-released-from-slavery.


[[ STAGE DIRECTION: Hold up maror (horseradish), or gesture to it. ]]


Lastly, but not the last thing before we eat, this is {{a spice with a characteristic // original oregano // // curious curry}}, a bitter herb. It symbolizes the bitterness of slavery and of having to wait 25 hours to eat dinner.


# {{ Page }}
## Glass of wine, reboot
It is now time for our fifth glass of wine. Wait, second? Darn. This is our second glass of wine. Sing.


בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי הַגָּפֶן:
Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, borei p’ree hagafen.
We praise God, Ruler of Everything, who creates the fruit of the vine.






# {{ Page }}
## Wash your hands and get back to work | rachtza
We will now pantomime washing our hands. We will then pantomime eating the entire meal. After mimicking the whole meal, we will then really eat the meal.


Say this with me:


בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ אֱלֹהֵֽינוּ מֶֽלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, אֲשֶׁר קִדְּשָֽׁנוּ בְּמִצְוֹתָיו, וְצִוָּנוּ
 עַל נְטִילַת יָדָֽיִם:
Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, asher kid’shanu b’mitzvotav v’tzivanu
al n’tilat yadayim.




# {{ Page }}
## Well, bless my little bread  | motzi matzah
At this point in the seder, it is customary for {{ Name of person at seder // // I am sitting next to ___// person on my left}} to {{ activity // square dance  // he always loves to _____ // yodel }}


[[ STAGE DIRECTION: Look at the named person. ]]


So do it.


Alternatively, you may hold up some matzoh while we all sing to bless this breadless bread.


[[ STAGE DIRECTION: All sing to the held-up matzoh ]]


    בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵֽינוּ מֶֽלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, הַמּוֹצִיא לֶֽחֶם מִן הָאָֽרֶץ:
    Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, hamotzi lechem min ha-aretz.
    We praise God, Ruler of Everything, who brings bread from the land.
 
בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵֽינוּ מֶֽלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, אֲשֶׁר קִדְּשָֽׁנוּ בְּמִצְוֹתַָיו וְצִוָּֽנוּ עַל אֲכִילַת מַצָּה:    
    Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, asher kid’shanu b’mitzvotav v’tzivanu
al achilat matzah.
    We praise God, Ruler of Everything, who made us holy through obligations, commanding us to eat matzah.


# {{ Page }}
## That’s a spicy Sweetaball! | maror
We now sing as we spread delicious charoset and religiously-significant (kinda gross) maror on so-gross-it-has-to-be-religiously-significant matzoh. This represents the bittersweetness of doing rituals when you’re hungry. Just dip--do not eat.




    בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיַָ אֱלֹהֵֽינוּ מֶֽלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, אֲשֶׁר קִדְּשָֽׁנוּ בְּמִצְוֹתָיו וְצִוָּֽנוּ עַל אֲכִילַת מָרוֹר:
    Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, asher kid’shanu b’mitzvotav v’tzivanu
al achilat maror.
    We praise God, Ruler of Everything, who made us holy through obligations, commanding us to eat bitter herbs.
 


## Eat but not the meal | koreich
We now eat this  {{ adjective // delightful // he had a ____ night // fabulous }} sandwich assembled in the previous step, as our ancestors did before us. As while they went through the desert, they had no time to eat a full six-course meal like the one in front of you. They only had time to eat one matzah sandwich. 


# {{ Page }}
## Re-do steps 1 through 14 before the meal
As is tradition, we must re-do the entire Haggadah up to this point, this time with more chutzpah, in observation of how our ancestors had to wait a very long time for freedom.


JK.




# {{ Page }}
## OMG can we eat now!? | shulchan oreich


JEEZ, we get it, you’re hungry, eat.


# {{ Page }}
## The THIRD glass of wine (starting to feel it yet?)
Please have your third glass of wine (we hope you didn’t have any more wine during dinner), and sing another song.




    בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי הַגָּפֶן:
    Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, borei p’ree hagafen.
    We praise God, Ruler of Everything, who creates the fruit of the vine.


# {{ Page }}
## Elijah’s cup. Ghosts like getting drunk, too! 


If there is anything we’ve learned from tonight, it’s that if you leave lamb’s blood on your door, nothing bad will ever happen to you, and that’s why I feel totally fine with leaving our door open for ghosts and {{ mythical creature // unicorn // // pegasus }}. My favorite of these is good old Elijlah, who is essentially the Santa Claus of Passover. Except instead of giving us presents, he drinks our wine. Let’s sing him a song.




אֵלִיָּֽהוּ הַנָּבִיא, אֵלִיָּֽהוּ הַתִּשְׁבִּי,    
אֵלִיָּֽהוּ, אֵלִיָּֽהוּ,אֵלִיָּֽהוּ הַגִּלְעָדִי.    
בִּמְהֵרָה בְיָמֵֽנוּ יָבוֹא אֵלֵֽינוּ    
עִם מָשִֽׁיחַ בֶּן דָּוִד,    
עִם מָשִֽׁיחַ בֶּן דָּוִד.    


    Eliyahu hanavi
    Eliyahu hatishbi
    Eliyahu, Eliyahu, Eliyahu hagiladi
    Bimheirah v’yameinu, yavo eileinu
    Im mashiach ben-David,
    Im mashiach ben-David


    Elijah the prophet, the returning,
    the man of Gilad:
    return to us speedily, in our days with the messiah, son of David.






# {{ Page }}
## Closing rites
## The FOURTH glass of wine
As we drink this last cup of wine, we contemplate what we want for this year. I, for one, want {{a thing one would want // money // he wants ____ // tacos }}. As we sing, we praise God, we appreciate one another, and we cherish the time we have together and the memories we create.


    בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי הַגָּפֶן:
    Baruch Atah Adonai, Eloheinu Melech ha-olam, borei p’ree hagafen.
 
    לְשָׁנָה הַבָּאָה בִּירוּשָׁלָֽיִם: 
    L’shana haba-ah biy’rushalayim!