# {{ Page }}
# Mad Liberation: Just the Magid
###### composed by Seth DiLorenzo, Josh and Rachael Silverbauer, and Doug Naphas


Welcome to the magid, the part of each Passover seder that becomes richer with each re-telling. We will begin this highly interactive and creativity-oriented magid by reading the entire book of Exodus. You think I’m kidding. Everyone please take out your Torahs.


While you are doing that, I’ll set the scene. It’s Egypt. It’s long ago. Jews are numerous. Jews are not yet slaves.


We can skip to page {{large number // 9837 // // 9308 }} where the story gets truly {{ adjective // jolly // // riveting }}. 


Once upon a time there lived a Pharaoh named {{Very long and complicated name // Tikki Tikki Tembo No Sarimbo Hari Kari Bushkie Perry Pem Do Hai Kai Pom Pom Nikki No Meeno Dom Barako. // They called him____ //  Hubert Blaine Wolfeschlegelsteinhausenbergerdorff, Sr.}} but that was too complicated, so mostly the people just referred to him as “Pharaoh.”


One day, on his daily walk to {{ geographic landmark // the Great Barrier Reef // he went to __ // Mount Rushmore}}, Pharaoh looked around and sneered, “There are so many Jews around here!  Pretty soon the lines at {{ place that is fun to go to // Six Flags  // we enjoyed going to ___ // IKEA }} will be too damn long.” Seeing a way to avert his grave problem, Pharaoh declared all Jews to be his slaves and that they should spend the rest of eternity {{ undertaking a massive project // building the Great Wall of China  // they focused on ___ // terraforming Mars}}. To control their numbers, he ordered all Jewish sons be tossed into {{ body of water // the Atlantic Ocean //  __ is a body of water // Lake Michigan}}. “I call it,” he mused to his Council, “the Game of Thrown.”


# {{ Page }}
## Guns ‘n’ Moses
Some Jews were just not having this. One Jewish mother sent her newborn baby, randomly named Moses, down the Nile river to save his life. “You’ll thank me later,” she called after him. 
Pharoah’s own {{ important person in one’s life // daughter // This is my __ // girlfriend}} discovered the baby and raised it right under his royal nose.


Skip 20 years, and Moses is a hip young millennial, discovering his Jewish roots and being super annoying about it. How did he first know he was Jewish, you ask? What did I tell you about questions? I don’t know, maybe it was the tingling sensation he felt when he first {{ very Jewish thing to do (past tense) // cooked latkes in synagogue // He __ // rocked out to Yentl }}. 


One day, on a leisurely stroll through the {{ gross place // // They are in the __ // mud pits}}, he witnessed an Egyptian man teasing a Jewish slave. The Egyptian said to the Jewish man, “{{ Immature insult // You’re ugly, stupid // He said to him, “ ___ “ // Your breath stinks }}.”


Moses knew what to do. He smashed the Egytian’s head with a(n) {{ very large item // boulder // a __  // refrigerator }}. Knowing his good intentions would be misunderstood, Moses decided to flee Egypt.
# {{ Page }}
## Easter’s coming, so save our peeps!
Moses spent the ensuing decades as a care-free {{ obscure occupation // toll-booth attendant // He was a ____// liontamer}} in the land of Midian. One day, while ambling near the local shrubs, he noticed that one was on fire, and that the fire could talk.


“I have a burning question,” the flame said. “And I’ll ask it the way I, God, always ask questions: with a command. I order you to liberate the {{ fictional race // hobbits // long ago lived an ancient race of ____ // fishpeople}} of {{ a geographic location // China //  __ is a location in the world// Burma }}, and then, when you finish that, to free the Jews.”


Moses said to God, “My skills mostly lie in {{ a strange area of skill // // … is skilled in __. // balancing things on other things }}. Am I really, like, the best person for this job?”


“Hell, no,” said God. “But Noah’s been avoiding me since the last thing I made him do, and you’re the first person I ran into. Don’t worry, I’ve got some {{ positive adjective // // // sick }} tools to help you out.”


# {{ Page }}
## God’s plague-ground
Moses returned to Egypt, ready to rumble. 


He ascended the royal staircase, pushed open the royal door, and wagged his staff in Pharaoh's royal face. “Let my people {{ intransitive verb, positive connotation  // pop // it likes to ___ // jiggle }}, freely.”


“What?” said Pharaoh with a yawn.


Vanquished, Moses shrank back and prepared to tell God that the task was impossible. God opened a channel of communication with Moses as only God finds convenient, by setting his {{ item needed to travel // travel toothbrush // // suitcase}} on fire, and speaking from the flames. “Go back and tell him he is messing with the wrong deity! In fact, he’s messing with the only deity! And it’s the wrong one.”
# {{ Page }}
### Blood | dam
Moses returned to the palace, ready to re-rumble. 


He ascended the royal staircase, pushed open the royal door, and wagged his staff in Pharaoh's royal face. “Let my people {{ intransitive verb, positive connotation  // dance // it likes to ___ // twerk }}, freely.”


Pharaoh muttered something incoherently as he ate his cereal.


Crushed, Moses turned all the liquids in Egypt into blood. Even the liquids that were already blood.


Unfazed, Pharaoh poured some blood from his {{ fancy piece of dishware // pitcher // I have a __ // desktop carafe }} into his bowl, kept eating, and kept enslaving.




# {{ Page }}
### Frogs | tzfardeiya
Moses re-returned to the palace, ready to re-re-rumble, more confident than ever.


He re-ascended the royal staircase, re-pushed open the royal door, and re-wagged his staff in Pharaoh's royal face. “Let my people {{ intransitive verb, positive connotation  // contemplate // it likes to ___ // kneel }}, in a free way.”


“Do you have an appointment?” asked Pharoah dismissively.


“Who are you, {{ someone who takes appointments // a doctor // // Dr. Evil }}?” said Moses, “I am appointed by God, who will smite thee into submission, visiting upon thee…”


“No,” said Pharaoh.


Dejected, Moses had God call all the frogs of the world to take up residence in the land of Egypt. They nested in pillows, in pots, and in the people’s {{ articles of clothing  // shirts // People wear ___ // underwear}}.


“Why is this bad?” asked Pharoah. “I love frogs.” Pharaoh crouched down and started acting like a frog, hopping around the palace, eating flies, nesting in pillows, breathing through his skin, and {{ doing something frogs do // // // biologically switching genders in times of low reproduction }}. People who knew him said he had never been happier.
# {{ Page }}
### Lice | kinim


Moses re-re-returned again to the palace, re-ready to re-re-re-rumble once more.


“Do you come bearing more gifts for me?” asked Pharoah sweetly.


“No,” said Moses, “Let my people go, or else...”


“What? You’ll turn every particle of sand in this desert into lice that will burrow into my skin and fill my mouth to the point where I can’t {{ do something you do with your mouth // talk // I will __. // blow up a balloon }}?”


Moses said, “Exactly.”


Pharoah {{ something one did excitedly  // stood up and clapped // it was so good she ___ // giggled ferociously}} “Excellent! I’ve been asking my wife to arrange that for me since our honeymoon, but she always gives me {{ an unwanted gift from one spouse to another // // // worn socks }}. Thank you!”


Moses and God decided to try the exact same thing in a slightly different way.


# {{ Page }}
### Wild Animals | arov


Moses once again re-re-re-returned afresh to the same palace as before, re-re-ready to re-re-re-re-rumble once re-more anew.


This time Moses caught Pharaoh in the royal {{ room(s) in or around a palace  // kitchens  // the __ // shipyard }}. “Be fair, oh. Just let ‘em go!” Moses petitioned. 


Pharaoh casually {{ did something one does when bored (past tense) // bit his nails // // spun a dreidel }} while Moses talked, and when he was finished, started biting Moses’s nails.


Pretty sure this wasn’t going anywhere, Moses summoned elephant-sized {{ animals with characteristics  // pensive pandas //  // preoccupied pygmy marmosets }} , {{ animals with characteristics  // gorgeous gorillas //  // porcine porcupines }}, and {{ animals with characteristics  // meddlesome meerkats //  // obtuse octopuses }} to roam the streets.


“Thank this GOD of yours,” Pharaoh said, slapping Moses on the back. “This will free up my zookeepers to work as slaves!”


Moses knew he and God needed to try yet another version of this very same tactic.
# {{ Page }}
### Cattle Disease | dever
Moses was getting impatient. He decided to surprise Pharoah in the {{ place in or around a house // bedroom //  // shower }}.


“Boo! Gonna let them go?” Moses inquired


“Don’t know what you’re talking about,” Pharaoh responded.


“Cattle Disease, then.” Moses said sharply. “Cattle disease.”


Pharaoh was later visited by the royal butcher. “My lord, a great tragedy has befallen our herds! Every cow in the land came down with {{ an old-time disease // dyptheria // came down with__ // syphilis}} this morning and their bones have turned into {{ something soft // pillows // soft as __ // oatmeal}}. Oh, what sorrow!” 


Pharaoh shrugged. “I feel bad for the cattle and all, but...I’ve been a vegetarian for years. Now I can finally have some guilt-free meat. And I can dress myself head to toe in guilt-free leather, tanned and tailored by guilt-free slaves. What’s Moses gonna do next, make me {{ go on a fad diet // give up carbs // I am going to __. // do a Master Cleanse }}?”
# {{ Page }}
### Boils | scheen
Moses and God decided to up their game. They already knew what Pharaoh was going to say the next day, so they planned a pre-emptive strike. 


“If a pox on your heffers moved you not to free the Jews, perhaps a pox on your people will,” Moses chanted.


The people erupted in boils.


Pharoah coyly said, “You know, I’ve never told anyone this, but I have quite a thing for boils. I just like how they look, so round and full of potential. Servants, come and dance for me, that I may admire your boils. Do the {{ named dance // Irish jig // Do the __. // twerk }}. You’re like a boil band! I’ll call you {{ a name for a boy band // // // Five Guys }}. Don’t cover up--I want to see every boil. No bandages. Let’s play a game: everyone pair off and hug each other until your boils rupture. The last one with a fully intact boil wins {{ a prize that involves a lot of physical contact //  // You win __. // a massage }}.


“But the real winner,” concluded Pharaoh, “is me. Thank you, Moses. Thank you.”
# {{ Page }}
### Hail | barad
When Pharaoh strode confidently the next morning into the {{ part of a palace // // She is in the __. // Greater Hall }}, the people cried out, “All hail, Pharaoh!”


“Indeed, all hail me, the great Pharaoh!”


“No,” the people explained. “It’s all hail out there, Pharaoh. The whole kingdom is covered in three feet of hail.”


“It’s raining hail! Hail-e-lujah!” said Pharaoh. “Hail is much better than rain. I hate rain. Avoiding rain is the reason I moved to Egypt from {{ a rainy place // // She is from __. // the rainforest }}. And it’s still too rainy here. At least the hail piles up on the ground, and cleaning it up gives the slaves something to do. Which reminds me: I’m gonna need some more slaves. Tell the Hebrews to start breeding again, but to stay slaves.”
# {{ Page }}
### Locusts | arbeh
“Ok,” said God unto Moses. “You don’t seem to be getting the point across. Why didn’t you tell me you were slow of speech, and not eloquent like {{ someone who is eloquent // // // the host of The Price is Right }}, and you would have a hard time communicating to Pharaoh the value of not being plagued by plagues all the time?”


“I have an idea,” Moses said slowly. “Why don’t you come with me to announce the next plague?”


And God said, “Great idea! I’ll accompany you into town in the form of a raging fire located on your {{ article of clothing // vest // I am wearing my __. // shoes }}.”


When Pharaoh claimed {{ an excuse for not showing up to a meeting (3rd person) // // He didn’t show up because __ . // he was cleaning his bookbags }} and didn’t show up to the meeting, God responded with locusts. They crawled all over everything in the kingdom, even more so than the frogs, and ate every scrap of hail that was left on the ground, which by this time was the Egyptians’ only form of sustenance.


“My Lord, the people are starving, there is no more hail,” complained whoever, and Pharaoh decreed, “Let them eat locusts,” and this actually brilliant strategy rid the land of locusts and fed the nation for a generation. “If it hadn’t been for the locusts,” mused Pharaoh, “I couldn’t even have afforded to feed all my natural-born citizens, and I would’ve had to free the slaves.”
# {{ Page }}
### Darkness | choshech
Pharaoh woke up the next morning with a guilt migraine. And a(n) {{ negative emotion // // // conscience }} hangover. And a(n) {{ negative emotion // // // disgust }} {{ physical ailment // // He is suffering from a(n) __ // nosebleed }}.


“Is it wrong to enslave people?” Pharaoh asked {{ a wise character from literature // // // Gandalf }}.


“Indeed, my liege,” advised the vizier, who was actually Moses in disguise, “I advise you to free the slaves. Please sign the following notarized legal document, which I happen to be carrying, and which states:


    “At sunrise tomorrow, or within a period not to exceed two days thereafter, the Jews are to be set free, thanks to the heroic efforts of Moses.”


Meanwhile, God had independently decided to invite the popular Egyptian sun god Ra to a three-day {{ long celebratory event // // ...going to a __ // Burning Man }} event, thus preventing the sun from rising for exactly three days in Egypt and Egypt only.


Exasperated, Moses asked God, “why didn’t you let me know you would leave me with this darkness during the window when my document was in effect?”


“Oh, I need to clear stuff with you now?” asked God sarcastically. “Maybe we should write a whole thousand page book setting forth Moses’s statutes, and about how Moses {{ did something God did // flooded the Earth for 40 days  // God __. // created the world }}, and how everyone has to {{ perform a religious observance // eat kosher // I have to __ // have Bat Mitzvahs }} for Moses.”
# {{ Page }}
### Slaying of the First Born | makat Bechorot
Losing patience with Moses, God decided to personally go house to house, door to door, trying to hire another prophet.


When that didn’t work, God decided to personally go house to house, door to door, selling {{ something you sell door to door //  //  // doors }}.


When that didn’t work, God decided to personally go house to house, door to door, and kill the first-born in each family with {{ a weapon // // I have __ // an adz }}.


The Jews were exempt, as they had been tipped off to God’s rampage, and had indicated their Jewishness by slaughtering lambs and painting their doors with lamb’s blood, to prove they had slaughtered lambs.


All Jewish people thus had their first-borns’ mercifully spared by the great act of slaughtering lambs, and the Jewish people celebrated by saying, “{{ a word of celebration // // // huzzah }}.” The Jewish sheep, though, having their first-born splattered on every door, pretty much broke even on the deal.


Moses said to Pharaoh: “That was the last and most terrible of all plagues. Do you surrender? Will you free the Jews now that God is all out of bad things to do to you?


Pharaoh responded: “Last plague? Sure, I guess I don’t need the Jews any more. I was only keeping them enslaved so I could keep those plagues coming.


“So get out of Egypt!” Pharaoh told the Jews. “But I have new slaves coming in twenty minutes, so you all need to be out of here right away. There’s no time to bake bread, even though that’s normally what you do before you leave to go somewhere.”


So Moses and the Jews departed Egypt towards freedom. Moses split the Red Sea in two to impress his {{ significant person in your life // mom //  // girlfriend }} & the Jews lived happily ever after in the middle of the ocean. 
# {{ Page }}
## Dayeinu
In freeing us Jews, one could say that God did so much more than the bare minimum required. God may have over-achieved.


If God had merely  {{verbed (past tense) a noun // funneled a beer // he once ___ // sat on a toilet}}, that would have been perfectly adequate.


Now if God had  {{verbed (past tense) a noun // baked a cake // he once ___ // picked his nose}}, that would have been satisfactory.


If God had  {{verbed (past tense) a noun // bit his tongue // he once ___ // farmed some vegetables}}, that would’ve worked, too.


This reminds me of a song.


STAGE DIRECTION: All sing Dayeinu.


אִלּוּ הוֹצִיאָֽנוּ מִמִּצְרַֽיִם, דַּיֵּנוּ:
Ilu hotzianu mi-mitzrayim, Dayeinu
If God had only taken us out of Egypt, that would have been enough!


אִלּוּ נָתַן לָֽנוּ אֶת־הַתּוֹרָה, דַּיֵּנוּ:
Ilu natan lanu et ha-Torah, Dayeinu
If God had only given us the Torah, that would have been enough.






אִלּוּ הוֹצִיאָֽנוּ מִמִּצְרַֽיִם, דַּיֵּנוּ:
Ilu hotzianu mi-mitzrayim, Dayeinu
If God had only taken us out of Egypt, that would have been enough!


אִלּוּ נָתַן לָֽנוּ אֶת־הַתּוֹרָה, דַּיֵּנוּ:
Ilu natan lanu et ha-Torah, Dayeinu
If God had only given us the Torah, that would have been enough.