# {{ Page }}
# Mad Liberation: The Four Sons of Passover
###### composed by Seth DiLorenzo, Josh and Rachael Silverbauer, and Doug Naphas


Perhaps you have heard of the Four Sons of Passover. Perhaps you think you know a thing or two about them. Perhaps you learned their story in {{ a place where you can learn things // the library // I learned that in __  // my neighbor’s basement }}.


Everything you know is wrong. About everything.


But I can only teach you about the sons. 


The first piece of groundbreaking information I can share about the sons is that there are four of them. Which I guess you already knew back when you were misinformed about the sons, so that one thing was true.


Other than that, {{ something you say when you don’t know what to say // um….err... // __ .... // Uhhhhh……...ummmmmm….. }} ...


# {{ Page }}
### The Wise Son 
Excuse me, but I am the wisest of sons. And sons are the wisest of children. So please allow me to mansplain all about the Four Sons.


And by, “Please allow me to,” I mean, “I am going to, no matter what you want.”


Jews learn from questions. It’s what makes us unique. Everyone else learns by {{ doing something that definitely does not teach you anything // // We are __. // skipping school }}.


The purpose of the Four Sons is to ask the questions that will inform all persons here who are less knowledgeable than me. Which is all of you.


My question is the greatest. It is the question after which all questions are modeled. It is {{ a paragon (a perfect example of something) // the Mona Lisa // // the Louvre }} of questions. And here it is:


{{ Something you’d be embarrassed to ask // What is water? // // Is it bad if my poop is yellow? }}
# {{ Page }}
### The Wise Answer
I think what you’re trying to say is, “What are the testimonials, statutes, and laws God has commanded us?”


Well, the prime testimonial is that we were slaves in Egypt and that means you should follow all the laws of Passover, including skipping dessert after dinner. It’s true. There’s no law on the amount of matzah you can have, though. Here is a synopsis of all of God’s highly relevant Biblical commands:
#### Chukim
These are known as the Inexplicable Laws, like “don’t mix wool with linen” and, “ {{ A weird piece of advice // Don’t put BBQ sauce in your pants // __ // Always sit on the butter before you eat it }}.”


#### Edot
These are the Explicable-But-Not-Intuitive Laws, like celebrating Shabbat, Festivals, and Rites of Passage, such as {{ something a kid learns to do growing up // riding a bicycle // __ is something I remember // the first time eating solid food }}.


#### Mishpatim
These are the Intuitive Laws, like don’t get caught stealing or  {{ something you’d probably get in trouble for if you were caught by your parents // watching too much TV // I got grounded for__ // punching your brother in his private parts}}.


Now, let me keep explaining...
# {{ Page }}
### The Wicked Son
Shut up! Stop talking. Where you do get off thinking you know everything?


Let me tell you what I get off on. I’m the Wicked Son and I get off on tangents.


What kind of tangents? Is that your question? All kinds of tangents. Mathematical tangents. Tan gents tanning at the beach. {{ A highly, highly, strange concept // gorillas doing Shakespeare on the Moon // // Dogs giving birth to cows }}. Anything unrelated to whatever’s happening.


Particularly whatever’s happening here, tonight. I don’t know what any of this is or how I got here, but I hate it.


And what’s up with these so called “commands?”  Who are you, {{ someone who gives commands // the commander // // Mom }}? If the commands are soooooo righteous, why am I forced to sit here and eat gefilte fish or wear this tight yarmulke?  And, like why do i have to {{ A complaint in present tense // go to school today // He was annoyed because he had to ____ // take my grandmother to church}} tonight?  What does all this mean to YOU?! 
# {{ Page }}
### The Wicked Answer
It means whatever God says it means!


Wicked Son, I blunt your teeth. I wish we never invited you, you are the worst of the children. You are worse than {{ A horrible person from history // Ghangis Khan // __ was a terrible person // Haman}}. But I’m still happy you’re here, in the broadest sense.


So I guess that, in a way, is an answer.


Let’s move on to the Simple Son.
# {{ Page }}
### The Simple Son


So, like, I have a pretty simple question.


{{ An extremely basic, fundamental question // // // What is this? }}


[[ Stage direction: Pretend you’re handing the Seder device to the next person, then don’t ]]


I’m sorry, let me take that back. That question and that reading device. That was a(n) {{ negative adjective // bad // // idiotic}} question. I’ll try again. 


{{ A very straightforward question // // // Why do we do this? }}


So, yeah, that was it. Simple question. And let me guess...the answer is, “We already heard the answer?” I usually get that...


I’m kinda like the plain pasta of sons. The {{ plain food // graham cracker // I am eating __  // yogurt}}, the matzah of sons, as it were.


Actually, even that’s too complicated. I’m a cup of white flour, scooped and eaten right out of the bag.


But if you think I’m dumb, wait til you hear from my little brother. We call him The Son Who Knows Not How To Ask.


Take it away, genius.
# {{ Page }}
### The Son Who Knows Not How to Ask


#### Grib hiksy fan
Ha ray behray tel ab et terrah. Tree weldicans, sming diggle {{ gibberish phrase // geng di boot wumph //  // gleg shifty tarley memdi katch ingoo}}. Schlups? SCHLUPS??? Fem benna ben, renna ren {{ US State // Maine // the great state of __ // New Mexico}} hen shakey.


##### Rik firf nerf shlipsy fango
Zing wish flooby? Helta cling {{ character in book or movie // Peter Pan // // Cinderella}} fish mish da lish!


#### Crybal mirk
Bander tots slursham say. Murph the ganders with the {{ adjective 3 syllables or longer // retrospective // // intermittent}} flub?  Doo hicken...Passover!




# {{ Page }}
## Meta-Dayeinu
Why, that’s the best question I’ve heard all night, and there have been a LOT of questions. 


If I had heard from just the first of this obnoxious family of all sons, that would have been enough. 


If we had stopped after the second son, that would have been quite enough. Quite.


If we were to just stop reading the Haggadah right now, eat, and skip the 83 sections we have left, go home, and {{ do something you do at home // nap // // binge }}, that would be enough for us.


For our ancestors, though, long, long ago in the land of Egypt, it was never enough.


No, no, our ancestors may have started as Four Sons. But those sons met Four Daughters. They got to know each other.


They multiplied. I don’t know a polite way to explain how this happened, but suffice it to say that it involved mommies and daddies, {{ items used by people who love each other // // // wedding cakes }}, {{ items used by people who hate each other // // // battle axes }}, and more than four glasses of wine.


Let’s pour out, but not drink up, some wine in honor of our multiplying ancestors, even the ones here with us tonight. So pour yourself some sederade, and sing a little song about how we used to be slaves.


בָדִים הָיִינוּ הָיִינוּ. עַתָּה בְּנֵי חוֹרִין:
Avadim hayinu. Ata b’nei chorin.


So maybe next year we should listen to the Four Daughters.